# coq2html: an HTML documentation generator for Coq

## Overview

coq2html is an HTML documentation generator for Coq source files.  It is an alternative to the standard coqdoc documentation generator distributed along with Coq.  The major feature of coq2html is its ability to fold proof scripts: in the generated HTML, proof scripts are initially hidden, but can be revealed one by one by clicking on the "Proof" keyword.  Here is an example of [folding in action](http://compcert.inria.fr/doc/html/Memory.html#Mem.valid_access_dec).

**Compatibility:** to produce cross-references, coq2html reads `.glob` files produced by Coq.  The format of those files is undocumented and changes silently between major releases of Coq.  The current version of coq2html is believed to be compatible with Coq 8.8, 8.7, and 8.6.

**History:** coq2html was developed and originally distributed as part of the [CompCert](http://compcert.inria.fr/) project when it became clear that the coqdoc of the time was not able to format the CompCert Coq sources the desired way.  This is the first release of coq2html as a stand-alone tool, independent from CompCert.

## Usage

```
          coq2html [options] file.glob ... file.v ...
```

Summary of options:

Option              | Summary
--------------------|----------------------------
`-base` _COQDIR_    | Set the name space for the modules being processed
`-coqlib` _URL_     | Set base URL for Coq standard library
`-d` _DIR_          | Output files to directory _DIR_ (default: current directory)
`-external` _URL_ _COQDIR_ | Set base URL for linking references whose names start with _COQDIR_
`-no-css`           | Do not add coq2html.css to the output directory
`-redirect`         | Generate redirection files 
`-short-names`      | Use short, unqualified module names in the output

### HTML generation

coq2html takes one or several Coq source files with extension `.v`, pretty-prints their contents, and saves the generated HTML text to files with extension `.html`.

By default all files are generated in the current working directory.  The `-d` _DIR_ option makes coq2html generate files in the given directory instead.  The directory _DIR_ must exist before coq2html is started.

In addition to HTML files, coq2html also produces two auxiliary files in the output directory given by `-d` or by default in the current directory:
* coq2html.css: the style sheet for the generated HTML files;
* coq2html.js: auxiliary JavaScript code that implements proof folding.

The `-no-css` option suppresses the generation of the coq2html.css file.  Users of this option are expected to provide their own style sheet.  It must be named coq2html.css and it must reside in the directory where coq2html generates its files.

For a source file `F.v` in the current directory and if no `-base` option is given, the generated HTML file is named `F.html`.  If the source file is in a subdirectory, or if the `-base` option is given, a Coq-style fully-qualified name is used as the name of the generated HTML file, as shown below:

`-base` option     |  Source file name     |   Generated HTML file name
-------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------
none               | `F.v`                 | `F.html`
none               | `D/E/F.v`             | `D.E.F.html`
`-base A.B.C`      | `F.v`                 | `A.B.C.F.html`
`-base A.B.C`      | `D/E/F.v`             | `A.B.C.D.E.F.html`

As strange as it looks, this file naming convention is compatible with that of coqdoc and ensures that file names are globally unique across multiple Coq libraries and packages.

The fully-qualified name is also used to produce the title of the generated HTML page.  In the last example above, the fully-qualified name is A.B.C.D.E.F and the title of the page will be **Module A.B.C.D.E.F**.  If the `-short-names` option is given, the unqualified, local name is used instead, giving **Module F** as title.

Earlier versions of coq2html used short names `F.html` instead of fully-qualified names to name the generated HTML files.  For backward compatibility, the `-redirect` option can be given.  It causes an additional `F.html` file to be generated, containing a HTTP redirection to the file `A.B.C.D.E.F.html`.  The `-redirect` option is silently ignored if no `-base` option is given.

### Cross-referencing

coq2html can generate cross-references as hyperlinks from uses to definitions of Coq names, provided the appropriate `.glob` files are given on the command-line.

A cross-reference file `F.glob` is generated by the Coq compiler coqc when it processes the `F.v` source file.  (Unless the `-no-glob` option is passed to coqc; don't do that.)  When giving `F.v` as argument to coq2html, also give `F.glob` as argument, so that coq2html can use those cross-references to produce hyperlinks.

**Important:** if the source files are compiled within a Coq namespace, you must give a `-base` option to coq2html indicating this namespace.  For example, if you compile with
```
        coqc -R A.B.C .
```
meaning that the current directory means namespace A.B.C, then you must invoke coq2html with
```
        coq2html -base A.B.C
```

By default, cross-references are generated if the referenced definition is
* in one of the `.glob` files given to coq2html on the command line, or
* in the Coq standard library.

For this reason, to get better cross-referencing, you should either do a single run of coq2html with all the `.v` and `.glob` files of your Coq development, or give all the `.glob` files of your library to every run of coq2html on every `.v` file.

The cross-references to the Coq standard library use the online version of this library at http://coq.inria.fr/library, which corresponds to the latest release of Coq.  If you wish to reference a specific version of the standard library, use the `-coqlib` option, e.g.
```
        coq2html -coqlib https://coq.inria.fr/distrib/8.5pl3/stdlib ...
```
for the 8.5pl3 version of the standard library.

Using the `-external` option, you can add cross-references to other external libraries whose coqdoc or coq2html-generated documentation is accessible online.  For example, 
```
        coq2html -external http://math-comp.github.io/math-comp/htmldoc mathcomp ...
```
should produce cross-references to the `mathcomp` library modules.  (Warning: untested feature.)

## Markup language for documentation comments

Documentation comments start with `(** ` (two stars followed by a space) or `(**r ` (two stars, the "r" character, one space).
```
     (** This is a documentation comment. *)
     (**r This is a right-aligned documentation comment. *)
     (* This is a regular comment. *)
```
Regular, non-documentation comments are removed from the HTML output, except within proof scripts, where they are kept as is.

Documentation comments of the `(**` kind are formatted as described next, then inserted as a paragraph in the HTML output.  Right-aligned documentation comments of the `(**r` kind are formatted likewise, but do not start a paragraph.  Instead, they hang to the right of the Coq code on the same line.  Example:
```
     (** This is the type of lists. *)

     Inductive list (A: Type) : Type :=
     | nil                         (**r the empty list *)
     | cons (hd: A) (tl: list A).  (**r the  nonempty list [hd::tl] *)
```

### Inline Coq text

Within a documentation comment, text within square brackets `[...]` is taken to be Coq text and is formatted in monospace font.  You can write `[x + S y]` and will get `x + S y`.  Square brackets nest properly, hence `[[x;y]]` gives `[x;y]`.

### Inline HTML

Within a documentation comment, text between hash signs `#...#` is treated as pure HTML and copied verbatim to the output, without escaping of HTML special characters.  Hence, `#...#` escapes are the only way to insert HTML tags.  Example:
```
    (** 32-bit integers are less than #2<sup>32</sup># *)
```

### Verbatim text

Verbatim text starts with `<<` on a line by itself and ends with `>>` on a line by itself.  The lines between those two markers are copied to the output, in typewriter font, respecting newlines.  Example:
```
(** This is normal documentation text.
<<
        This is verbatim text.
        Second line of verbatim text.
>>
    This is normal text again. *)
```

Warning: `<<` and `>>` must be at the beginning of a line, without any space before.

### Sections

Section titles are denoted by one to four `*` characters at the beginning of a documentation comment:
```
    (** * Section title *)
    (** ** Subsection *)
    (** *** Sub-sub section *)
    (** **** Sub-sub-sub section *)
```
The section title extends until the end of the documentation comment.

### Lists of items

Lists start with a dash `-` at the beginning of the line.  Subsequent lines starting with a dash are items in the list.  A blank line terminates the list.  Example:
```
(** A list is either:
-     [nil], denoting the empty list;
-     [cons h t], also written [h :: t], denoting the nonempty list
      with head [h] and tail [t].

  If we remove the [nil] case and declare a [CoInductive], we get infinite 
  streams instead of lists. *)
```
Nested lists are built using two, three or four dashes instead of one:
```
- Outer list, item #1
-- Inner list, item #1
-- Inner list, item #2
- Outer list, item #2
```

### Special handling of proof scripts

Proof scripts are Coq text (outside comments) that
* starts with `Proof` or `Next Obligation` at the beginning of a line;
* ends with `Qed.` or `Defined.` or `Save.` or `Admitted.` or `Abort.` at the end of a line.

A proof script can start and end on the same line, e.g. `Proof. auto. Qed.`

Proof scripts are formatted in a smaller font and folded by default, leaving only the starting line (`Proof`, etc) visible.  Clicking on this first line displays the whole proof script.

The syntax of proof scripts is strict.  In particular, after stating a `Theorem` or `Lemma`, it does not work to omit the `Proof` keyword and start the script immediately, nor to abort it immediately with `Admitted.` or `Abort.`.  Likewise, the dot `.` must follow `Qed`, `Defined`, etc, without spaces.  For example, the following proof scripts won't be properly formatted:
```
Lemma x:...
auto. Qed.                      (* No "Proof." to mark the beginning of the script. *)

Lemma x:...
Admitted.                       (* No "Proof." to mark the beginning of the script. *)

Lemma x:...
Proof. auto. Defined .          (* Whitespace between "Defined" and "." *)

Lemma x:...  Proof. Admitted.   (* "Proof" must start a new line. *)
```









