An interactive tutorial on specifying and implementing the simply-typed
lambda calculus in Coq.


INSTALLATION

  This tutorial depends on the `Metalib.Metatheory` library, available from
  [https://github.com/plclub/metalib](https://github.com/plclub/metalib).
  Make sure that you compile and install this library _first_.

  After you have done that, you can use make to compile the tutorial material
  and generate the documentation.

    `make`                  - Compile all Coq files
    `make html`             - Make documentation

CONTENTS

Read through the tutorial files in this order. Some files have embedded
exercises; their solutions are in the associated `sol` directory.

     Lec1.v            - First set of lecture notes, with exercises
                         about LN
     Definitions.v     - Specification of STLC using locally nameless
                         representation (LN)
     Lec2.v            - LN continued: type soundness for STLC
     Lemmas.v          - Auxiliary lemmas about LN, generated by LNgen tool
     Nominal.v         - Definition of STLC using nominal representation,
                         abstract machine based small-step semantics
     Connect.v         - Proof that nominal abstract machine implements
                         LN substitution-based small-step semantics

Warning: the exercises start simple, but ramp up. The first two exercise files
have significantly simpler exercises than the second two files.

EXTRA

The `extra` directory includes files and recipes that were used to generate
the some of the above definitions and lemmas, using
the [Ott](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~pes20/ott/)
and [LNgen](https://github.com/plclub/lngen) tools.

     stlc.ott          - Ott specification of STLC
     stlc.mng          - LaTeX source
     gen.mk            - Makefile recipes for invoking Ott/LNgen/LaTex

     stlc.pdf          - PDF version of rules
     Stlc.v            - Ott-generated version of `Definitions.v`
     Stlc_inf.v        - LNgen generated version of `Lemmas.v`

  If you have Ott and LNgen installed, you may also generate the files above.

    `make -f gen.mk stlc.pdf`
    `make -f gen.mk Stlc.v`
    `make -f gen.mk Stlc_inf.v`

CREDITS

 Tutorial author: Stephanie Weirich, based on prior a tutorial by Brian
 Aydemir and Stephanie Weirich, with help from Aaron Bohannon, Nate Foster,
 Benjamin Pierce, Jeffrey Vaughan, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, and Steve
 Zdancewic.  Adapted from code by Arthur Chargu'eraud.
